EXECUTION_FRAMEWORK_AND_MONITORING.md, before:

# Execution Framework & Monitoring Plan

This document summarizes the operational framework for driving the five-batch program to completion, focusing on cadence, governance, validation, and observability.

## Progress Tracking Dashboard
| Batch | Priority | Status | Progress | Target Date | Blockers |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Batch 1: Critical Blockers | P0 | 🔴 Not Started | 0% | Week 1–2 | None |
| Batch 2: Infrastructure | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 3–4 | Batch 1 |
| Batch 3: Security | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 5–6 | Batch 2 |
| Batch 4: AI/ML | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 7–8 | Batch 3 |
| Batch 5: Observability | P2 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 9–10 | Batch 4 |

## Immediate Next Actions (Week 1)
- **CI/CD Emergency Fix (Day 1–2):** Investigate failing workflows, run `npm run test:ci` locally, stabilize service dependencies, and unblock merging.
- **Security Scan Review:** Triage OWASP ZAP findings by severity and open sub-issues; remediate critical/high items immediately.
- **Quality Gates:** Remove permissive `continue-on-error` steps, require green status checks, and align branch protections after CI stabilizes.

## Weekly Progress Report Template
Copy the template into a GitHub issue every Friday:

```
## Weekly Progress Report - Week [X]

### 🎯 Current Batch: [Batch Name]

**Overall Progress:** [X]% complete

### ✅ Completed This Week
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]

### 🚧 In Progress
- [ ] [Item] - [Owner] - [% complete]
- [ ] [Item] - [Owner] - [% complete]

### ⚠️ Blockers
- [Blocker description] - [Resolution plan]

### 📊 Metrics This Week
- PRs merged: [X]
- CI pass rate: [X]%
- Test coverage: [X]%
- Production incidents: [X]
- Mean time to deploy: [X] minutes

### 📅 Next Week Goals
- [ ] [Specific goal]
- [ ] [Specific goal]
- [ ] [Specific goal]

### 🆘 Help Needed
- [Specific ask]

### 🎉 Wins
- [Celebrate accomplishments]
```

## Development Workflow
1. **Setup:**
   - Create feature branch from latest `main` (`git fetch origin && git rebase origin/main`).
   - Use branch naming `type/issue-short-desc`.
2. **Implementation Checklist:**
   - Write failing tests first (TDD), implement, and ensure lint/format pass.
   - Update documentation and changelog where applicable.
3. **Pre-PR Validation:**
   - Run `npm run typecheck`, `npm run lint`, `npm run test`, `npm run test:integration`, and `npm run build`.
4. **PR Template:**
   - Provide description, linked issues, change type, testing evidence, and screenshots where relevant.

## Risk Management (Review Weekly)
| Risk | Probability | Impact | Mitigation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Batch 1 CI fixes incomplete | High | Critical | Allocate additional resources; enable emergency admin merge if required. |
| Technical debt growth | Medium | High | Enforce fix-forward policy before new features. |
| Team burnout | Medium | High | Maintain sustainable pace; celebrate incremental wins. |
| Scope creep | High | Medium | Hold strict batch boundaries and defer non-critical work. |
| Breaking changes impact users | Low | Critical | Use feature flags, phased rollout, and rollback plan. |

## Runbooks to Author or Update
- `docs/runbooks/ci-debugging.md` – diagnosing CI failures.
- `docs/runbooks/database-optimization.md` – Neo4j/Postgres tuning and connection pooling guidance.
- `docs/runbooks/incident-response.md` – production incident handling.
- `docs/runbooks/deployment-checklist.md` – pre-deploy validation and rollback steps.

## Communication Plan
- **Daily:** Short status update in team chat (2–3 sentences).
- **Weekly:** Detailed progress report using the template above.
- **Bi-weekly:** Demo completed work to stakeholders.
- **Monthly:** Retrospective focused on process improvements.

## Validation Commands (Staging)
- CI stabilization and security: `npm run test:ci` (root), review OWASP findings.
- Workflow quality gates: verify removal of `continue-on-error` and confirm required checks in branch protection.

## Monitoring and Observability Targets
- **CI Reliability:** <5% flake rate, workflows under 5 minutes where possible.
- **Security:** Zero outstanding critical/high vulnerabilities; OWASP scans clean.
- **Coverage:** ≥80% on changed code paths; track trend in reporting issues.
- **Deployment:** Mean time to deploy under 30 minutes; rollback verified in staging.

## Execution Plan Automation
The `execution-plan.json` file now tracks batch metadata and metrics in a structured way. A small utility under `tools/execution/batchTracker.js` keeps the dashboard markdown in sync and reduces manual bookkeeping.

### Commands
- `node tools/execution/batchTracker.js dashboard` — render the markdown dashboard table using the current plan state.
- `node tools/execution/batchTracker.js weekly "Week X"` — emit the weekly report template with the latest metrics and statuses.
- `EXECUTION_PLAN_PATH=path/to/custom.json node tools/execution/batchTracker.js update <batchId> status=in-progress progress=50 owner=alice` — update a batch without editing JSON by hand.

Update `execution-plan.json` via the CLI (or by editing the file) and re-run the commands above to refresh the dashboard/report content.

Commit message:

feat: harden execution tracker automation

EXECUTION_FRAMEWORK_AND_MONITORING.md, after:

# Execution Framework & Monitoring Plan

This document summarizes the operational framework for driving the five-batch program to completion, focusing on cadence, governance, validation, and observability.

## Progress Tracking Dashboard
| Batch | Priority | Status | Progress | Target Date | Blockers |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Batch 1: Critical Blockers | P0 | 🔴 Not Started | 0% | Week 1–2 | None |
| Batch 2: Infrastructure | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 3–4 | Batch 1 |
| Batch 3: Security | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 5–6 | Batch 2 |
| Batch 4: AI/ML | P1 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 7–8 | Batch 3 |
| Batch 5: Observability | P2 | ⚪ Queued | 0% | Week 9–10 | Batch 4 |

Generate this table and the weekly report scaffold directly from the plan via the CLI:

```bash
node tools/execution/batchTracker.js dashboard
node tools/execution/batchTracker.js weekly "Week 1"
```

## Immediate Next Actions (Week 1)
- **CI/CD Emergency Fix (Day 1–2):** Investigate failing workflows, run `npm run test:ci` locally, stabilize service dependencies, and unblock merging.
- **Security Scan Review:** Triage OWASP ZAP findings by severity and open sub-issues; remediate critical/high items immediately.
- **Quality Gates:** Remove permissive `continue-on-error` steps, require green status checks, and align branch protections after CI stabilizes.

## Weekly Progress Report Template
Copy the template into a GitHub issue every Friday:

```
## Weekly Progress Report - Week [X]

### 🎯 Current Batch: [Batch Name]

**Overall Progress:** [X]% complete

### ✅ Completed This Week
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]
- [ ] [Specific accomplishment]

### 🚧 In Progress
- [ ] [Item] - [Owner] - [% complete]
- [ ] [Item] - [Owner] - [% complete]

### ⚠️ Blockers
- [Blocker description] - [Resolution plan]

### 📊 Metrics This Week
- PRs merged: [X]
- CI pass rate: [X]%
- Test coverage: [X]%
- Production incidents: [X]
- Mean time to deploy: [X] minutes

### 📅 Next Week Goals
- [ ] [Specific goal]
- [ ] [Specific goal]
- [ ] [Specific goal]

### 🆘 Help Needed
- [Specific ask]

### 🎉 Wins
- [Celebrate accomplishments]
```

## Development Workflow
1. **Setup:**
   - Create feature branch from latest `main` (`git fetch origin && git rebase origin/main`).
   - Use branch naming `type/issue-short-desc`.
2. **Implementation Checklist:**
   - Write failing tests first (TDD), implement, and ensure lint/format pass.
   - Update documentation and changelog where applicable.
3. **Pre-PR Validation:**
   - Run `npm run typecheck`, `npm run lint`, `npm run test`, `npm run test:integration`, and `npm run build`.
4. **PR Template:**
   - Provide description, linked issues, change type, testing evidence, and screenshots where relevant.

## Risk Management (Review Weekly)
| Risk | Probability | Impact | Mitigation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Batch 1 CI fixes incomplete | High | Critical | Allocate additional resources; enable emergency admin merge if required. |
| Technical debt growth | Medium | High | Enforce fix-forward policy before new features. |
| Team burnout | Medium | High | Maintain sustainable pace; celebrate incremental wins. |
| Scope creep | High | Medium | Hold strict batch boundaries and defer non-critical work. |
| Breaking changes impact users | Low | Critical | Use feature flags, phased rollout, and rollback plan. |

## Runbooks to Author or Update
- `docs/runbooks/ci-debugging.md` – diagnosing CI failures.
- `docs/runbooks/database-optimization.md` – Neo4j/Postgres tuning and connection pooling guidance.
- `docs/runbooks/incident-response.md` – production incident handling.
- `docs/runbooks/deployment-checklist.md` – pre-deploy validation and rollback steps.

## Communication Plan
- **Daily:** Short status update in team chat (2–3 sentences).
- **Weekly:** Detailed progress report using the template above.
- **Bi-weekly:** Demo completed work to stakeholders.
- **Monthly:** Retrospective focused on process improvements.

## Validation Commands (Staging)
- CI stabilization and security: `npm run test:ci` (root), review OWASP findings.
- Workflow quality gates: verify removal of `continue-on-error` and confirm required checks in branch protection.

## Monitoring and Observability Targets
- **CI Reliability:** <5% flake rate, workflows under 5 minutes where possible.
- **Security:** Zero outstanding critical/high vulnerabilities; OWASP scans clean.
- **Coverage:** ≥80% on changed code paths; track trend in reporting issues.
- **Deployment:** Mean time to deploy under 30 minutes; rollback verified in staging.

## Execution Plan Automation
The `execution-plan.json` file now tracks batch metadata and metrics in a structured way. A small utility under `tools/execution/batchTracker.js` keeps the dashboard markdown in sync and reduces manual bookkeeping.

### Commands
- `node tools/execution/batchTracker.js dashboard` — render the markdown dashboard table using the current plan state.
- `node tools/execution/batchTracker.js weekly "Week X"` — emit the weekly report template with the latest metrics and statuses.
- `EXECUTION_PLAN_PATH=path/to/custom.json node tools/execution/batchTracker.js update <batchId> status=in-progress progress=50 owner=alice` — update a batch without editing JSON by hand.

Update `execution-plan.json` via the CLI (or by editing the file) and re-run the commands above to refresh the dashboard/report content.
