services/ingest/README.md, before:

# Ingest Service

FastAPI microservice for ingesting CSV/JSON/S3 data, mapping to canonical fields, detecting PII, and emitting normalized events to Redis Streams.

## Endpoints

- `POST /ingest/jobs` – Start an ingestion job.
- `GET /ingest/jobs/{id}` – Retrieve status for a job.

## Sample

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/ingest/jobs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "sourceType": "csv",
    "source": "services/ingest/sample_data/sample.csv",
    "schemaMap": $(cat services/ingest/sample_data/mapping.json),
    "redactionRules": $(cat services/ingest/sample_data/redaction.json)
  }'
```

## EventEnvelope

```
{
  "tenantId": "t1",
  "entityType": "person",
  "attributes": {"entityId": "1", "fullName": "Alice", "email": "[REDACTED]", "phone": "[REDACTED]"},
  "provenance": {"source": "services/ingest/sample_data/sample.csv"},
  "policy": {"redaction": {"email": "[REDACTED]", "phone": "[REDACTED]"}}
}
```

## Development

Install dependencies and run tests:

```bash
cd services/ingest
pip install -e .[dev]
pytest
```

Commit message:

feat: add Dask preprocessing pipeline for ingest wizard (#1453)
## Summary
- implement a Dask-backed PostgreSQL preprocessing pipeline with
normalization, feature extraction, anomaly detection, and OpenTelemetry
spans
- add pytest coverage and a synthetic benchmark harness for the
preprocessing workflow
- wire the ingest wizard flow to use the ML preprocessing pipeline and
surface quality insights for postgres jobs

## Testing
- pytest ml/tests/test_preprocessing_pipeline.py
services/ingest/tests/test_ingest.py

------
https://chatgpt.com/codex/tasks/task_e_68d6cb478dc48333a896af582bfa8f87

services/ingest/README.md, after:

# Ingest Service

FastAPI microservice for ingesting CSV/JSON/S3 data, mapping to canonical fields, detecting PII, and emitting normalized events to Redis Streams.

## Endpoints

- `POST /ingest/jobs` – Start an ingestion job.
- `GET /ingest/jobs/{id}` – Retrieve status for a job.

### Postgres + ML Preprocessing (Workstream 69)

- `sourceType: "postgres"` enables the Dask/OpenTelemetry-enhanced pipeline from the
  Summit ML engine (see PR #1368 notes). Provide `postgresOptions` with the table or
  query metadata and the ingest wizard surfaces the returned `qualityInsights`
  metrics for analysts.

## Sample

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/ingest/jobs \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "sourceType": "csv",
    "source": "services/ingest/sample_data/sample.csv",
    "schemaMap": $(cat services/ingest/sample_data/mapping.json),
    "redactionRules": $(cat services/ingest/sample_data/redaction.json)
  }'
```

## EventEnvelope

```
{
  "tenantId": "t1",
  "entityType": "person",
  "attributes": {"entityId": "1", "fullName": "Alice", "email": "[REDACTED]", "phone": "[REDACTED]"},
  "provenance": {"source": "services/ingest/sample_data/sample.csv"},
  "policy": {"redaction": {"email": "[REDACTED]", "phone": "[REDACTED]"}}
}
```

## Development

Install dependencies and run tests:

```bash
cd services/ingest
pip install -e .[dev]
pytest
```
