server/docs/GRAPHQL_OPTIMIZATION.md, before:

# GraphQL Optimization Guide

This document describes the GraphQL performance optimizations implemented in the IntelGraph platform, including DataLoader batching, query complexity analysis, automatic persisted queries (APQ), and performance monitoring.

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [DataLoader Implementation](#dataloader-implementation)
3. [Query Complexity Analysis](#query-complexity-analysis)
4. [Automatic Persisted Queries (APQ)](#automatic-persisted-queries-apq)
5. [Performance Monitoring](#performance-monitoring)
6. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
7. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The GraphQL implementation has been optimized to address common performance issues:

- **N+1 Query Problem**: Solved using DataLoader for batch loading
- **Expensive Queries**: Controlled using query complexity analysis
- **Network Bandwidth**: Reduced using Automatic Persisted Queries
- **Monitoring**: Comprehensive performance tracking and N+1 detection

### Performance Improvements

- **Up to 90% reduction** in database queries for list operations
- **50-70% reduction** in query execution time for nested resolvers
- **60% reduction** in network bandwidth with APQ
- **Real-time N+1 detection** with actionable insights

## DataLoader Implementation

### What is DataLoader?

DataLoader is a batching and caching layer that sits between resolvers and data sources. It:

1. **Batches** multiple individual loads into a single database query
2. **Caches** results for the duration of a request
3. **Prevents** N+1 query problems automatically

### Architecture

```
GraphQL Query
    ↓
Resolvers
    ↓
DataLoaders (batch + cache)
    ↓
Database (single batch query)
```

### Available DataLoaders

#### Entity Loader

Batches entity fetches from Neo4j:

```typescript
// Before (N+1 problem)
const entities = await Promise.all(
  ids.map(id => {
    const session = driver.session();
    return session.run('MATCH (n:Entity {id: $id}) RETURN n', { id });
  })
);
// Executes N queries!

// After (with DataLoader)
const entities = await Promise.all(
  ids.map(id => context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id))
);
// Executes 1 batched query!
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/entityLoader.ts`

**Features**:
- Batch loading by ID
- Request-scoped caching
- Tenant isolation
- Error handling

#### Relationship Loader

Batches relationship fetches from Neo4j:

```typescript
// Load relationship by ID
const relationship = await context.loaders.relationshipLoader.load(id);

// Load relationships by source entity
const relationships = await context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(entityId);

// Load relationships by target entity
const relationships = await context.loaders.relationshipsByTargetLoader.load(entityId);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/relationshipLoader.ts`

#### Investigation Loader

Batches investigation fetches from PostgreSQL:

```typescript
const investigation = await context.loaders.investigationLoader.load(id);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/investigationLoader.ts`

#### User Loader

Batches user fetches from PostgreSQL:

```typescript
// By ID
const user = await context.loaders.userLoader.load(userId);

// By email
const user = await context.loaders.userByEmailLoader.load(email);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/userLoader.ts`

### Using DataLoaders in Resolvers

#### Basic Usage

```typescript
const entityResolvers = {
  Query: {
    entity: async (_: any, { id }: { id: string }, context: any) => {
      // Use DataLoader instead of direct database query
      return context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id);
    },
  },

  Entity: {
    // Field resolver for relationships
    relationships: async (parent: any, _: any, context: any) => {
      return context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(parent.id);
    },
  },
};
```

#### Batch Loading Pattern

```typescript
// BAD: N+1 problem
async function getEntitiesWithRelationships(entityIds: string[]) {
  const results = [];
  for (const id of entityIds) {
    const entity = await fetchEntity(id); // N queries
    const relationships = await fetchRelationships(id); // N more queries
    results.push({ entity, relationships });
  }
  return results;
}

// GOOD: Using DataLoader
async function getEntitiesWithRelationships(entityIds: string[], context: any) {
  // DataLoader batches all entity fetches into 1 query
  const entities = await Promise.all(
    entityIds.map(id => context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id))
  );

  // DataLoader batches all relationship fetches into 1 query
  const relationships = await Promise.all(
    entityIds.map(id => context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(id))
  );

  return entities.map((entity, i) => ({
    entity,
    relationships: relationships[i],
  }));
}
```

### Configuration

DataLoaders are created per-request in the GraphQL context:

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/apollo-v5-server.ts
async function createContext({ req }: { req: any }): Promise<GraphQLContext> {
  const neo4jDriver = getNeo4jDriver();
  const pgPool = getPostgresPool();
  const tenantId = req.user?.tenantId || 'default';

  const loaders = createDataLoaders({
    neo4jDriver,
    pgPool,
    tenantId,
  });

  return {
    loaders,
    user: req.user,
    // ...
  };
}
```

**Configuration Options**:

- `maxBatchSize`: Maximum number of items per batch (default: 100)
- `batchScheduleFn`: Timing function for batch execution (default: 10ms)
- `cache`: Enable/disable caching (default: true)

## Query Complexity Analysis

### Purpose

Prevents expensive queries from overwhelming the server by calculating query cost before execution.

### How It Works

Each field has a complexity score. The total query complexity is calculated by:

1. Traversing the query AST
2. Summing field complexity scores
3. Applying multipliers for lists
4. Comparing against maximum allowed complexity

### Configuration

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/plugins/queryComplexityPlugin.ts
createQueryComplexityPlugin({
  maximumComplexity: 1000, // Global limit
  getMaxComplexityForUser: (context) => {
    // Role-based limits
    switch (context.user?.role) {
      case 'admin': return 5000;
      case 'analyst': return 2000;
      case 'viewer': return 500;
      default: return 1000;
    }
  },
  enforceComplexity: true, // Reject complex queries
  logComplexity: true, // Log all query complexities
})
```

### Complexity Estimators

#### Default Estimator

Simple estimator assigns cost of 1 per field:

```graphql
query {
  entity(id: "1") {   # Cost: 1
    id                # Cost: 1
    name              # Cost: 1
  }
}
# Total complexity: 3
```

#### List Multiplier

Lists multiply complexity by the limit:

```graphql
query {
  entities(limit: 100) {  # Cost: 100
    id                    # Cost: 1 per item = 100
    name                  # Cost: 1 per item = 100
  }
}
# Total complexity: 300
```

#### Custom Complexity

Use field extensions for custom complexity:

```graphql
type Query {
  expensiveSearch(query: String!, limit: Int): [Entity]
    @complexity(value: 50, multipliers: ["limit"])

  graph(depth: Int, limit: Int): Graph
    @complexity(value: 10, multipliers: ["depth", "limit"])
}
```

### Monitoring

Query complexity is logged for every request:

```json
{
  "level": "info",
  "operationName": "GetEntities",
  "complexity": 450,
  "maxComplexity": 1000,
  "user": "user-123",
  "msg": "GraphQL query complexity analyzed"
}
```

Queries exceeding limits are rejected:

```json
{
  "errors": [{
    "message": "Query is too complex: 1500. Maximum allowed complexity: 1000",
    "extensions": {
      "code": "QUERY_TOO_COMPLEX",
      "complexity": 1500,
      "maximumComplexity": 1000
    }
  }]
}
```

## Automatic Persisted Queries (APQ)

### What is APQ?

APQ reduces network bandwidth by allowing clients to send query hashes instead of full queries.

### Protocol

1. **First Request**: Client sends query hash
2. **Server Response**: `PersistedQueryNotFound` if not cached
3. **Second Request**: Client sends full query + hash
4. **Server**: Caches query and returns result
5. **Subsequent Requests**: Client sends only hash, server uses cached query

### Benefits

- **60% reduction** in request size for typical queries
- **Improved CDN caching** (GET requests instead of POST)
- **Reduced parsing overhead** on server

### Client Configuration

#### Apollo Client

```typescript
import { createPersistedQueryLink } from '@apollo/client/link/persisted-queries';
import { sha256 } from 'crypto-hash';

const link = createPersistedQueryLink({
  sha256,
  useGETForHashedQueries: true,
}).concat(httpLink);

const client = new ApolloClient({
  link,
  cache: new InMemoryCache(),
});
```

#### Manual Implementation

```typescript
const query = `query GetEntity($id: ID!) { entity(id: $id) { id name } }`;
const hash = sha256(query);

// First request (hash only)
const response1 = await fetch('/graphql', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    extensions: {
      persistedQuery: {
        version: 1,
        sha256Hash: hash,
      },
    },
    variables: { id: '123' },
  }),
});

// If PersistedQueryNotFound, send full query
if (response1.errors?.[0]?.extensions?.code === 'PERSISTED_QUERY_NOT_FOUND') {
  const response2 = await fetch('/graphql', {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      query,
      extensions: {
        persistedQuery: {
          version: 1,
          sha256Hash: hash,
        },
      },
      variables: { id: '123' },
    }),
  });
}
```

### Server Configuration

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/plugins/apqPlugin.ts
createAPQPlugin({
  redis: redisClient, // Use Redis for distributed caching
  ttl: 86400, // Cache for 24 hours
  enabled: true,
  keyPrefix: 'apq:', // Redis key prefix
})
```

### Monitoring

APQ cache statistics:

```typescript
import { getAPQStats } from './graphql/plugins/apqPlugin.js';

const stats = await getAPQStats(redisClient);
console.log(stats);
// { cacheSize: 1234, cacheType: 'redis' }
```

## Performance Monitoring

### Comprehensive Metrics

The performance monitoring plugin tracks:

- **Query duration**: Total execution time
- **Resolver count**: Number of resolver executions
- **DataLoader stats**: Batch calls and cache hits
- **N+1 detection**: Potential N+1 query issues
- **Query depth**: Nesting level
- **Field count**: Total fields requested

### Log Output

```json
{
  "level": "info",
  "operationName": "GetInvestigation",
  "duration": 245,
  "resolverCount": 42,
  "dataLoaderStats": {
    "entityCalls": 15,
    "relationshipCalls": 10,
    "investigationCalls": 1,
    "userCalls": 2,
    "totalBatchedCalls": 28
  },
  "potentialN1Issues": [
    {
      "resolver": "Entity.relationships",
      "callCount": 15
    }
  ],
  "queryDepth": 4,
  "fieldCount": 87,
  "msg": "GraphQL operation performance"
}
```

### N+1 Detection

Automatically detects potential N+1 issues:

```json
{
  "level": "warn",
  "operationName": "GetEntities",
  "issues": [
    {
      "resolver": "Entity.relationships",
      "callCount": 50,
      "suggestion": "Consider using DataLoader for Entity.relationships"
    }
  ],
  "msg": "Potential N+1 query issues detected"
}
```

### Response Extensions

In development, performance metrics are included in response:

```json
{
  "data": { ... },
  "extensions": {
    "performance": {
      "duration": 245,
      "resolverCount": 42,
      "dataLoaderStats": { ... },
      "potentialN1Issues": [ ... ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Best Practices

### 1. Always Use DataLoaders

**BAD**:
```typescript
Query: {
  investigation: async (_, { id }, context) => {
    const session = driver.session();
    const result = await session.run('MATCH (n:Investigation {id: $id}) RETURN n', { id });
    await session.close();
    return result.records[0];
  }
}
```

**GOOD**:
```typescript
Query: {
  investigation: async (_, { id }, context) => {
    return context.loaders.investigationLoader.load(id);
  }
}
```

### 2. Batch Related Data

**BAD**:
```typescript
Entity: {
  async relationships(parent, _, context) {
    // Separate query for each entity
    const session = driver.session();
    const result = await session.run(
      'MATCH (n:Entity {id: $id})-[r]-() RETURN r',
      { id: parent.id }
    );
    await session.close();
    return result.records;
  }
}
```

**GOOD**:
```typescript
Entity: {
  async relationships(parent, _, context) {
    // Batched via DataLoader
    return context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(parent.id);
  }
}
```

### 3. Limit List Sizes

```typescript
Query: {
  entities: async (_, { limit = 25, offset = 0 }, context) => {
    // Always enforce maximum limit
    const safeLimit = Math.min(limit, 100);
    // ...
  }
}
```

### 4. Use Pagination

```graphql
type Query {
  entities(
    limit: Int = 25
    offset: Int = 0
    after: String  # Cursor for cursor-based pagination
  ): EntityConnection!
}

type EntityConnection {
  edges: [EntityEdge!]!
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
}
```

### 5. Monitor Performance

```typescript
// Add custom metrics
logger.info({
  operation: 'complexQuery',
  duration: Date.now() - start,
  itemCount: results.length,
}, 'Custom operation completed');
```

## Troubleshooting

### High Query Complexity

**Symptom**: `QUERY_TOO_COMPLEX` errors

**Solutions**:
1. Reduce query depth
2. Limit list sizes
3. Split into multiple smaller queries
4. Request higher complexity limit for your role

### N+1 Query Warnings

**Symptom**: Warnings in logs about N+1 issues

**Solutions**:
1. Check if DataLoader is being used
2. Verify DataLoader is in the context
3. Ensure field resolvers use DataLoader
4. Review resolver implementation

### Slow Queries

**Symptom**: High duration in performance logs

**Solutions**:
1. Check DataLoader batch sizes
2. Review database query efficiency
3. Add database indexes
4. Optimize resolver logic
5. Consider caching strategies

### APQ Not Working

**Symptom**: Full queries still being sent

**Solutions**:
1. Verify APQ is enabled on server
2. Check client configuration
3. Ensure Redis is connected (production)
4. Verify query hashing matches server expectations

### DataLoader Cache Issues

**Symptom**: Stale data being returned

**Solutions**:
1. Ensure DataLoaders are request-scoped (created per request)
2. Don't share DataLoaders across requests
3. Clear cache explicitly if needed: `loader.clear(key)`

## Environment Variables

```bash
# Query Complexity
ENFORCE_QUERY_COMPLEXITY=true  # Enforce complexity limits (default: true in production)

# APQ
ENABLE_APQ=true                # Enable automatic persisted queries (default: true)

# Monitoring
LOG_QUERY_PERFORMANCE=true     # Log all query performance metrics (default: true)
LOG_N1_WARNINGS=true          # Log N+1 detection warnings (default: true)

# DataLoader
DATALOADER_MAX_BATCH_SIZE=100  # Maximum items per batch (default: 100)
DATALOADER_BATCH_WINDOW_MS=10  # Batch window in milliseconds (default: 10)
```

## Performance Benchmarks

### Before Optimization

- **Query**: Fetch 50 entities with relationships
- **Database Queries**: 101 (1 for entities + 100 for relationships)
- **Duration**: ~2500ms
- **Network**: ~150KB

### After Optimization

- **Database Queries**: 2 (1 batched entity query + 1 batched relationship query)
- **Duration**: ~250ms (90% improvement)
- **Network**: ~60KB with APQ (60% reduction)

## References

- [DataLoader Documentation](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader)
- [GraphQL Query Complexity](https://github.com/slicknode/graphql-query-complexity)
- [Apollo APQ Specification](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/performance/apq/)
- [GraphQL Best Practices](https://graphql.org/learn/best-practices/)

Commit message:

fix: harden graphql persisted allowlist

server/docs/GRAPHQL_OPTIMIZATION.md, after:

# GraphQL Optimization Guide

This document describes the GraphQL performance optimizations implemented in the IntelGraph platform, including DataLoader batching, query complexity analysis, automatic persisted queries (APQ), and performance monitoring.

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [DataLoader Implementation](#dataloader-implementation)
3. [Query Complexity Analysis](#query-complexity-analysis)
4. [Automatic Persisted Queries (APQ)](#automatic-persisted-queries-apq)
5. [Performance Monitoring](#performance-monitoring)
6. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
7. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The GraphQL implementation has been optimized to address common performance issues:

- **N+1 Query Problem**: Solved using DataLoader for batch loading
- **Expensive Queries**: Controlled using query complexity analysis
- **Network Bandwidth**: Reduced using Automatic Persisted Queries
- **Monitoring**: Comprehensive performance tracking and N+1 detection

### Performance Improvements

- **Up to 90% reduction** in database queries for list operations
- **50-70% reduction** in query execution time for nested resolvers
- **60% reduction** in network bandwidth with APQ
- **Real-time N+1 detection** with actionable insights

## DataLoader Implementation

### What is DataLoader?

DataLoader is a batching and caching layer that sits between resolvers and data sources. It:

1. **Batches** multiple individual loads into a single database query
2. **Caches** results for the duration of a request
3. **Prevents** N+1 query problems automatically

### Architecture

```
GraphQL Query
    ↓
Resolvers
    ↓
DataLoaders (batch + cache)
    ↓
Database (single batch query)
```

### Available DataLoaders

#### Entity Loader

Batches entity fetches from Neo4j:

```typescript
// Before (N+1 problem)
const entities = await Promise.all(
  ids.map(id => {
    const session = driver.session();
    return session.run('MATCH (n:Entity {id: $id}) RETURN n', { id });
  })
);
// Executes N queries!

// After (with DataLoader)
const entities = await Promise.all(
  ids.map(id => context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id))
);
// Executes 1 batched query!
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/entityLoader.ts`

**Features**:
- Batch loading by ID
- Request-scoped caching
- Tenant isolation
- Error handling

#### Relationship Loader

Batches relationship fetches from Neo4j:

```typescript
// Load relationship by ID
const relationship = await context.loaders.relationshipLoader.load(id);

// Load relationships by source entity
const relationships = await context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(entityId);

// Load relationships by target entity
const relationships = await context.loaders.relationshipsByTargetLoader.load(entityId);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/relationshipLoader.ts`

#### Investigation Loader

Batches investigation fetches from PostgreSQL:

```typescript
const investigation = await context.loaders.investigationLoader.load(id);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/investigationLoader.ts`

#### User Loader

Batches user fetches from PostgreSQL:

```typescript
// By ID
const user = await context.loaders.userLoader.load(userId);

// By email
const user = await context.loaders.userByEmailLoader.load(email);
```

**Location**: `server/src/graphql/dataloaders/userLoader.ts`

### Using DataLoaders in Resolvers

#### Basic Usage

```typescript
const entityResolvers = {
  Query: {
    entity: async (_: any, { id }: { id: string }, context: any) => {
      // Use DataLoader instead of direct database query
      return context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id);
    },
  },

  Entity: {
    // Field resolver for relationships
    relationships: async (parent: any, _: any, context: any) => {
      return context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(parent.id);
    },
  },
};
```

#### Batch Loading Pattern

```typescript
// BAD: N+1 problem
async function getEntitiesWithRelationships(entityIds: string[]) {
  const results = [];
  for (const id of entityIds) {
    const entity = await fetchEntity(id); // N queries
    const relationships = await fetchRelationships(id); // N more queries
    results.push({ entity, relationships });
  }
  return results;
}

// GOOD: Using DataLoader
async function getEntitiesWithRelationships(entityIds: string[], context: any) {
  // DataLoader batches all entity fetches into 1 query
  const entities = await Promise.all(
    entityIds.map(id => context.loaders.entityLoader.load(id))
  );

  // DataLoader batches all relationship fetches into 1 query
  const relationships = await Promise.all(
    entityIds.map(id => context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(id))
  );

  return entities.map((entity, i) => ({
    entity,
    relationships: relationships[i],
  }));
}
```

### Configuration

DataLoaders are created per-request in the GraphQL context:

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/apollo-v5-server.ts
async function createContext({ req }: { req: any }): Promise<GraphQLContext> {
  const neo4jDriver = getNeo4jDriver();
  const pgPool = getPostgresPool();
  const tenantId = req.user?.tenantId || 'default';

  const loaders = createDataLoaders({
    neo4jDriver,
    pgPool,
    tenantId,
  });

  return {
    loaders,
    user: req.user,
    // ...
  };
}
```

**Configuration Options**:

- `maxBatchSize`: Maximum number of items per batch (default: 100)
- `batchScheduleFn`: Timing function for batch execution (default: 10ms)
- `cache`: Enable/disable caching (default: true)

## Query Complexity Analysis

### Purpose

Prevents expensive queries from overwhelming the server by calculating query cost before execution.

### How It Works

Each field has a complexity score. The total query complexity is calculated by:

1. Traversing the query AST
2. Summing field complexity scores
3. Applying multipliers for lists
4. Comparing against maximum allowed complexity

### Configuration

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/plugins/queryComplexityPlugin.ts
createQueryComplexityPlugin({
  maximumComplexity: 1000, // Global limit
  getMaxComplexityForUser: (context) => {
    // Role-based limits
    switch (context.user?.role) {
      case 'admin': return 5000;
      case 'analyst': return 2000;
      case 'viewer': return 500;
      default: return 1000;
    }
  },
  enforceComplexity: true, // Reject complex queries
  logComplexity: true, // Log all query complexities
})
```

### Complexity Estimators

#### Default Estimator

Simple estimator assigns cost of 1 per field:

```graphql
query {
  entity(id: "1") {   # Cost: 1
    id                # Cost: 1
    name              # Cost: 1
  }
}
# Total complexity: 3
```

#### List Multiplier

Lists multiply complexity by the limit:

```graphql
query {
  entities(limit: 100) {  # Cost: 100
    id                    # Cost: 1 per item = 100
    name                  # Cost: 1 per item = 100
  }
}
# Total complexity: 300
```

#### Custom Complexity

Use field extensions for custom complexity:

```graphql
type Query {
  expensiveSearch(query: String!, limit: Int): [Entity]
    @complexity(value: 50, multipliers: ["limit"])

  graph(depth: Int, limit: Int): Graph
    @complexity(value: 10, multipliers: ["depth", "limit"])
}
```

### Monitoring

Query complexity is logged for every request:

```json
{
  "level": "info",
  "operationName": "GetEntities",
  "complexity": 450,
  "maxComplexity": 1000,
  "user": "user-123",
  "msg": "GraphQL query complexity analyzed"
}
```

Queries exceeding limits are rejected:

```json
{
  "errors": [{
    "message": "Query is too complex: 1500. Maximum allowed complexity: 1000",
    "extensions": {
      "code": "QUERY_TOO_COMPLEX",
      "complexity": 1500,
      "maximumComplexity": 1000
    }
  }]
}
```

## Automatic Persisted Queries (APQ)

### What is APQ?

APQ reduces network bandwidth by allowing clients to send query hashes instead of full queries.

### Protocol

1. **First Request**: Client sends query hash
2. **Server Response**: `PersistedQueryNotFound` if not cached
3. **Second Request**: Client sends full query + hash
4. **Server**: Caches query and returns result
5. **Subsequent Requests**: Client sends only hash, server uses cached query

### Benefits

- **60% reduction** in request size for typical queries
- **Improved CDN caching** (GET requests instead of POST)
- **Reduced parsing overhead** on server

### Production allowlisting

- The server now loads a persisted operation manifest (by default `client/src/generated/graphql.json` or `persisted-operations.json`) and enforces it on `/graphql` in production.
- Operation IDs **and** APQ SHA-256 hashes are accepted; matching entries inject the canonical query text before execution.
- Multiple manifest files are merged so blue/green or overlay manifests can co-exist during deployments.
- Non-allowlisted queries return `403 PERSISTED_QUERY_REQUIRED` unless `ALLOW_NON_PERSISTED_QUERIES=true` is explicitly set for development.
- GET requests that send persisted identifiers via query string are normalized the same way as POST bodies so CDNs can cache them safely.

### Client Configuration

#### Apollo Client

```typescript
import { createPersistedQueryLink } from '@apollo/client/link/persisted-queries';
import { sha256 } from 'crypto-hash';

const link = createPersistedQueryLink({
  sha256,
  useGETForHashedQueries: true,
}).concat(httpLink);

const client = new ApolloClient({
  link,
  cache: new InMemoryCache(),
});
```

#### Manual Implementation

```typescript
const query = `query GetEntity($id: ID!) { entity(id: $id) { id name } }`;
const hash = sha256(query);

// First request (hash only)
const response1 = await fetch('/graphql', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    extensions: {
      persistedQuery: {
        version: 1,
        sha256Hash: hash,
      },
    },
    variables: { id: '123' },
  }),
});

// If PersistedQueryNotFound, send full query
if (response1.errors?.[0]?.extensions?.code === 'PERSISTED_QUERY_NOT_FOUND') {
  const response2 = await fetch('/graphql', {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      query,
      extensions: {
        persistedQuery: {
          version: 1,
          sha256Hash: hash,
        },
      },
      variables: { id: '123' },
    }),
  });
}
```

### Server Configuration

```typescript
// server/src/graphql/plugins/apqPlugin.ts
createAPQPlugin({
  redis: redisClient, // Use Redis for distributed caching
  ttl: 86400, // Cache for 24 hours
  enabled: true,
  keyPrefix: 'apq:', // Redis key prefix
})
```

### Monitoring

APQ cache statistics:

```typescript
import { getAPQStats } from './graphql/plugins/apqPlugin.js';

const stats = await getAPQStats(redisClient);
console.log(stats);
// { cacheSize: 1234, cacheType: 'redis' }
```

## Performance Monitoring

### Comprehensive Metrics

The performance monitoring plugin tracks:

- **Query duration**: Total execution time
- **Resolver count**: Number of resolver executions
- **DataLoader stats**: Batch calls and cache hits
- **N+1 detection**: Potential N+1 query issues
- **Query depth**: Nesting level
- **Field count**: Total fields requested

### Log Output

```json
{
  "level": "info",
  "operationName": "GetInvestigation",
  "duration": 245,
  "resolverCount": 42,
  "dataLoaderStats": {
    "entityCalls": 15,
    "relationshipCalls": 10,
    "investigationCalls": 1,
    "userCalls": 2,
    "totalBatchedCalls": 28
  },
  "potentialN1Issues": [
    {
      "resolver": "Entity.relationships",
      "callCount": 15
    }
  ],
  "queryDepth": 4,
  "fieldCount": 87,
  "msg": "GraphQL operation performance"
}
```

### N+1 Detection

Automatically detects potential N+1 issues:

```json
{
  "level": "warn",
  "operationName": "GetEntities",
  "issues": [
    {
      "resolver": "Entity.relationships",
      "callCount": 50,
      "suggestion": "Consider using DataLoader for Entity.relationships"
    }
  ],
  "msg": "Potential N+1 query issues detected"
}
```

### Response Extensions

In development, performance metrics are included in response:

```json
{
  "data": { ... },
  "extensions": {
    "performance": {
      "duration": 245,
      "resolverCount": 42,
      "dataLoaderStats": { ... },
      "potentialN1Issues": [ ... ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Best Practices

### 1. Always Use DataLoaders

**BAD**:
```typescript
Query: {
  investigation: async (_, { id }, context) => {
    const session = driver.session();
    const result = await session.run('MATCH (n:Investigation {id: $id}) RETURN n', { id });
    await session.close();
    return result.records[0];
  }
}
```

**GOOD**:
```typescript
Query: {
  investigation: async (_, { id }, context) => {
    return context.loaders.investigationLoader.load(id);
  }
}
```

### 2. Batch Related Data

**BAD**:
```typescript
Entity: {
  async relationships(parent, _, context) {
    // Separate query for each entity
    const session = driver.session();
    const result = await session.run(
      'MATCH (n:Entity {id: $id})-[r]-() RETURN r',
      { id: parent.id }
    );
    await session.close();
    return result.records;
  }
}
```

**GOOD**:
```typescript
Entity: {
  async relationships(parent, _, context) {
    // Batched via DataLoader
    return context.loaders.relationshipsBySourceLoader.load(parent.id);
  }
}
```

### 3. Limit List Sizes

```typescript
Query: {
  entities: async (_, { limit = 25, offset = 0 }, context) => {
    // Always enforce maximum limit
    const safeLimit = Math.min(limit, 100);
    // ...
  }
}
```

### 4. Use Pagination

```graphql
type Query {
  entities(
    limit: Int = 25
    offset: Int = 0
    after: String  # Cursor for cursor-based pagination
  ): EntityConnection!
}

type EntityConnection {
  edges: [EntityEdge!]!
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
}
```

### 5. Monitor Performance

```typescript
// Add custom metrics
logger.info({
  operation: 'complexQuery',
  duration: Date.now() - start,
  itemCount: results.length,
}, 'Custom operation completed');
```

## Troubleshooting

### High Query Complexity

**Symptom**: `QUERY_TOO_COMPLEX` errors

**Solutions**:
1. Reduce query depth
2. Limit list sizes
3. Split into multiple smaller queries
4. Request higher complexity limit for your role

### N+1 Query Warnings

**Symptom**: Warnings in logs about N+1 issues

**Solutions**:
1. Check if DataLoader is being used
2. Verify DataLoader is in the context
3. Ensure field resolvers use DataLoader
4. Review resolver implementation

### Slow Queries

**Symptom**: High duration in performance logs

**Solutions**:
1. Check DataLoader batch sizes
2. Review database query efficiency
3. Add database indexes
4. Optimize resolver logic
5. Consider caching strategies

### APQ Not Working

**Symptom**: Full queries still being sent

**Solutions**:
1. Verify APQ is enabled on server
2. Check client configuration
3. Ensure Redis is connected (production)
4. Verify query hashing matches server expectations

### DataLoader Cache Issues

**Symptom**: Stale data being returned

**Solutions**:
1. Ensure DataLoaders are request-scoped (created per request)
2. Don't share DataLoaders across requests
3. Clear cache explicitly if needed: `loader.clear(key)`

## Environment Variables

```bash
# Query Complexity
ENFORCE_QUERY_COMPLEXITY=true  # Enforce complexity limits (default: true in production)

# APQ
ENABLE_APQ=true                # Enable automatic persisted queries (default: true)

# Monitoring
LOG_QUERY_PERFORMANCE=true     # Log all query performance metrics (default: true)
LOG_N1_WARNINGS=true          # Log N+1 detection warnings (default: true)

# DataLoader
DATALOADER_MAX_BATCH_SIZE=100  # Maximum items per batch (default: 100)
DATALOADER_BATCH_WINDOW_MS=10  # Batch window in milliseconds (default: 10)
```

## Performance Benchmarks

### Before Optimization

- **Query**: Fetch 50 entities with relationships
- **Database Queries**: 101 (1 for entities + 100 for relationships)
- **Duration**: ~2500ms
- **Network**: ~150KB

### After Optimization

- **Database Queries**: 2 (1 batched entity query + 1 batched relationship query)
- **Duration**: ~250ms (90% improvement)
- **Network**: ~60KB with APQ (60% reduction)

## References

- [DataLoader Documentation](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader)
- [GraphQL Query Complexity](https://github.com/slicknode/graphql-query-complexity)
- [Apollo APQ Specification](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/performance/apq/)
- [GraphQL Best Practices](https://graphql.org/learn/best-practices/)
